The growing divide between men and women
is one of the biggest issues of the 21st
century. It's driving down marriage
rates and birth [music] rates, and it's
warping our politics in unusual ways.
Last May, I talked to the social
scientist Alice Evans, [music]
who argues that a big factor here is the
retreat into digital solitude.
So, is the [music] smartphone killing
sex? And what can we do to bring men and
women back together? the coupling
[music] crisis at large
seems to be linked somehow to
technology, right? Yes, that's what I
think certainly I I so I think we can
say you know there could be locally
specific factors that go on in each
place each place has its own cultural
idiosyncrasies and I don't want to
ignore that but yes absolutely the big
shock that's occurred everywhere all at
once is we've seen vast improvements in
personal online entertainment so we know
for example in the US
>> podcasting you know I mean everyone
everyone
>> especially podcasters
>> that's right
>> so people are spending more no but I
think that's the thing I I mean no
offense Ross but I do blame charismatic
people like you. You know, if people
want to socialize, the listeners,
>> this is a new podcast. It It's played no
role at all yet.
>> Okay. You are you protest your
>> distracting in distracting the young
people of America.
>> Okay. Okay. You're totally innocent.
Okay. But we do have this big incre
increase in personal online
entertainment, whether it's, you know,
watching shows on Netflix, uh, sports
bets, you know, online gambling has
become absolutely massive across Brazil
and Latin America more broadly. You can,
you know what, go on Pornhub. You know,
online connectivity enables people to
stroll on Instagram, play Call of Duty,
World of Warcraft. So, we're all
becoming, it's not just, you know, being
single. We're all retreating into this
digital solitude. And I think that's
partly because technology makes it nicer
and easier to stay at home. You can work
from home. And it's so and some of these
apps are so hyperengaging that you sort
of get distracted by the the constant
stream of dopamine hits as each as each
app as each technology company competes
against others to keep its users hooked.
And and effectively the tech is out
competing personal interactions. That's
my fear. And that holds then as a global
explanation because even though there's
tons of variation in internet access and
so on, smartphone penetration is a
global phenomenon, right? You know, you
go you go to India and Africa and you
find people with smartphones
>> and and that there's the big difference
that subsahara and Africa has much much
lower rates of smartphone penetration.
>> Right? So as the iPhone moves
across subsaharan Africa, you would
expect fertility rates to fall. But so
how much of this So you've just been
talking about
>> distraction, right? Entertainment,
right? That it's easier to
>> it's easier to play a video game than go
to a bar. It's easier to do sports
gambling at home than, you know, meet a
nice lady in a broadbrimmed hat at the
racetrack as one does. Um, but how much
of it is distraction per se in your view
and how much of it is a sort of you
might say like digital segregation of
men and women where men and women aren't
just going online but they're going
online in sort of distinct ways and not
interacting with each other. I I totally
agree that in person you get when I
think that male female friendships are
really important driver of gender
equality because as you come to care
about someone as a friend as you listen
to their stories as you as you hear
about how their day was or the kind of
things they don't like and you and they
say hey you know I was interviewing this
guy in Catalonia in Spain and he was
telling me that you know they went they
went to to watch a football game at the
bar and the women were saying that they
didn't like it when guys were rowdy or
aggressive or when one of his female
friends was approached by a guy and She
said no to him. He he called her a pa.
He called her, you know, a or
something. And and she was saying to the
her friend that that was distressing.
She didn't like that. And because he
cared about her friend, his friend, he
sort of understood that and he
empathized that and he he moderated his
own behavior. And I and I I think that
building trust, rapport, understanding
of what offends or you know, not even
just offense, but having a sense of what
matters to the other person. Certain I I
absolutely agree that retreating into
these digital spaces of solitude it
harms our understanding and also our
solidarity more broad you know whether
we care about other people. Right.
>> Right. Well no and that's one
[clears throat] of the distinctive
features of current politics around the
developed world certainly is some kind
of polarization of the sexist. Right.
where um and it was I think less extreme
in the end in the most recent US
election than some people had
anticipated. Um, but I I wonder too if
there's sort of, you know, there's sort
of a feedback loop here, right, where
the sexes don't interact and therefore
are more likely to sort of like like
marriage and relationships are
themselves a moderating influence
in in an interesting way, right?
>> I definitely believe that. And so people
don't have that influence and then they
go online and like if you are you know
if you're on social media right where
people are always sort of performing
their politics and you see a lot of
liberal women or a lot of conservative
men sort of performing their politics
you you know it's and those aren't your
politics right and you have no
relationship to those people. It just
seems a lot easier to sort of create a
kind of [snorts] hostile generalization
about right-wing men or left-wing
feminists, right, than if you're having
any kind of interpersonal face-to-face
interaction.
>> I think that's all true and I absolutely
agree that intimate partnerships are a
major important factor for building
mutual understanding, you know, common
ground, etc. That said, I don't think
this is just about men not understanding
women. sort of men from Mars, women from
Venus story because if you look at some
modern trends, say for example the the
discourse of secular monks whereby a guy
will spend, you know, a young American
man will, you know, I'm going to eat
these specific macros. I'll have 200
grams of protein. I'll spend, you know,
two hours on the bike. That's a guy with
no friends. That's a guy who's
prioritizing optimizing his physique and
he's not strengthening and he's not
building friendships. He's not building
rapport. He's he's not be becoming a
funny, charismatic guy. So, this isn't
just a gender issue. It's a solitude
issue of of people losing the capacity,
losing the social skill to charm and
make friends. And and if you don't have
a network that is socially active, then
even if you wanted to go out, no one is.
And so, it's all it's all reinforcing,
right?
>> And so, what about economic forces
besides the smartphone, right? So
digital life has entered into a world
where um young men are falling behind.
Young women in education, men with lower
levels of education are having I think a
particular particularly hard time
finding a mate or pairing off. If you
look at trends at least in the US for
marriage rates, college educated women,
marriage rate is down a bit. Women
without a college degree, the marriage
rate is way down. Right.
>> Yes. Um, and so one way to look at this
is that, you know, men are losing a
certain kind of status. They care about
status, right? When they lose status,
they become more sexist, more hostile to
women, become less attractive to women
by virtue of being hostile. Um, is that
that's one way to look at it, right?
>> Certainly, I think we can think about
this in two ways. So certainly as women
increasingly enter the labor force and
yet higher skills then they can be more
economically independent and they can
choose to be alone. So they would only
marry if a guy is charming, you know, if
they if they have find love. But of
course the the phones may be hurting
that or if the guy offers a desirable
package of goods, whether that's
attractiveness, entertainingness or
money, right? You know, money is
impressive for many of us. So I think
that the most disadvantaged guys
certainly may struggle to offer an
appealing package and as you rightly
say, the marriage rates are plummeting.
you know, chiefly among the most
disadvantaged men is the men who are
earning least, who are most likely to
stay at home with their parents to be
single, who can't necessarily offer an
attractive package of goods. I should
just say that it's not that not entirely
that young men are getting less
educated, rather that the most
disadvantaged men are struggling in in
education. So, I certainly think that
aspect is partly about economics. And
what what is a what do you think a man
is supposed to do in this kind of
situation? Right? Because on the one
hand, there clearly is a male reaction
to this this sort of economic landscape
that's very toxic. You know, sort of
anti-female misogynist lashing out,
right? At the same time, you know,
there's a kind of there's a cultural
script that says it's really good for
women to be independent. You don't need
a man, right? And
women still like male status, right?
It's not just men who want status. Women
like it. Like there's a lot of data on
women like the idea of having a man who
can potentially earn more than them,
right? Who can be a bread winner, maybe
not all the time, right? But if you're
going to have kids, it's nice to have a
man a man around, right? Who can be the
primary earner for a period of time,
right? So it's not that women are really
excited to enter into relationships with
men who have less education than they do
or who earn who earn less than they do.
Right? So so those those men are
>> in a kind of in a kind of trap that
isn't just created by you know their own
sort of sense of masculine identity.
It's also created by women's preferences
>> 100% and created by the broader economic
structures.
>> Open-ended question. what can bring the
sexes back together?
>> So I think that if it's the case that
technology is the major friction then we
need to look at the political economy
because each tech company to be
successful they want to distract us and
and and hoover up our attention for as
long as possible for as much as
possible. So the market mechanism is
really against coupling and my concern
is that tech companies are just becoming
so much more engaging, more affable,
more charismatic, you know, more more
shocking enjoy, you know, Mr. Beast. Oh,
what's he going to do now? That's so
engaging, right? Um, so my concern is
that what if tech outco competes our
social connections? And that already
seems to be happening, not just in
coupling, but you know, the the wider
rise in solitude. And so I I honestly
don't know the answers, but here are a
couple of things we could do. One is we
could think about how do we regulate
technology in some way. So Jonathan
height has has really done fantastic
work in encouraging you know phones free
schools for example and that would be
important in enabling young people to
actually talk to each other to you know
play in the parks to chat to make jokes
to learn how to make jokes to let become
less anxious. I think that's really
important but it's clearly not a
sufficient solution because us as adults
are also you know vulnerable to just
getting sucked into all these things
>> right this is what what strikes me about
about his ideas right is that it's very
easy in I shouldn't say it's very easy
but it's relatively easy in a liberal
individualist society to say okay we
need to make a certain set of social
changes that impose restrictions on kids
right because kids are the great the
great exception that doesn't quite fit
within liberal liberal social they're
not really part of the social contract
and so on right um
>> and so and he's he's gotten a lot of
traction I think I think there will be
there already is but there will
increasingly be an attempt to sort of
master
the you know the sort of lure of the
virtual as it applies especially to
younger kids
for me to see that once you get further
into adolescence where you know so much
of the adult life you're trying to get
kids to join is online, right? Um and
then it's really hard for me to see how
um certainly any kind of sort of
political restriction could like people
are just adults are just seem very very
unlikely to accept it. Now maybe there
will be cases where people say ah in the
US this sports betting experiment that
we've done bit of a mistake right maybe
maybe maybe it wasn't the best idea to
put ads for sports gambling you know in
in every on every TV network that you
know airs a baseball game or something
maybe that gets walked back but it it
does seem harder to see how you get any
kind of social restrictions on adult
distraction. What do you think?
Absolutely and politically it's very
difficult. So there I think
[clears throat] there are two tensions.
One is both the demand and the supply
that as humans become more hooked and
dependent on these personal online
entertainment then we want to protect
those freedoms and simultaneously all
the various companies from Netflix to
sports gambling will lobby different
political parties to prevent any kind of
restrictions and regulations. And then
even if say for example one was trying
to have a church building program or a
program to champion the church, the
church is fighting against all those
competing distractions and or or even if
you're doing something secular like a
community fair or community festival,
some people may well say as they so
often do, hey, I'll rather just stay
home in my pajamas and enjoy what'sever
on TV.